---
title: "Juan de Fuca Trail in a day"
date: "2019-09-28"
---

Earlier this summer my friend James invited me to join him and Francis on the Juan de Fuca trail for a one-day push. The Juan de Fuca Marine trail is a 47km trail on the west coast of Vancouver Island with around 1800m of elevation gain, starting (or finishing, depending on direction) just 10km below the terminus of the ultra famous West Coast trail. It takes you through beautiful old growth forests, with spectacular views of the ocean never more than a few kilometres apart. This run had been on my mind after another one of my friends had ran it two summers before, and is actually one of the reasons I started training for ultras. I would say the biggest crux of the trip is trying to figure out rides as it’s a point to point run in a relatively remote area, so with the offer on the table for James’ brother to shuttle us it was hard to say no. And so, on another Friday afternoon after work I found myself on the ferry headed to Victoria for our rendezvous.

After getting organized, we drove up to Sombrio Beach, the halfway point of our run, and set up camp for the night. Early the next morning, the ~25km drive back to the start of the trailhead at China Beach made me realize just how long the day was going to feel. Starting shortly after 7, our ran began with a short jaunt of fun single-track down to the first crossing at Mystic Beach. This section happened to be the highlight of the day for me with the final descent breaking us out from the trees and descending down a steep wooden staircase to the beach. Here there was a thick fog hanging over the ocean with the vibrant sunrise bathing the sea of clouds in a million different hues of morning light, and the contrast between the dark, dense early morning forest and this breathtaking view was truly special.

The next 20K to Chin Beach was the biggest slog, with seemingly endless hills. Although the climbs are never much more than 500 feet, the trail almost never stays flat. The trail also has a bit of a reputation for being a mud pit, and it definitely lived up to it for us. I remember at one-point James stuck his foot down in a particularly deep pool, and it came back out without a shoe! By the time we made it back to Sombrio we had stopped avoiding the mud and had accepted it as our reality. Here we stopped for lunch and refuelled for the second half of the trail.

With the worst of it behind us the next few beach crossings flew by. However, by the last 10K we were starting to slow down and were definitely feeling the added effort of navigating across all of the logs, branches and mud. Luckily when you travel South to North the trail gets continually easier and we managed to run the entire last portion of the trail from Parkinson to Botanical Beach. We raced each other up the last hill and were completely spent at the finish. Here we met up again with James’ brother who loaded us up with water and snacks for the drive home. FYI, a 2-hour drive in the back of a small car isn’t too kind to sore muscles. Back in Victoria, we hobbled out of the car and hit Bin4 for their late night ½ price burgers where I unapologetically devoured 2 full meals. After I was honestly still hungry, so I think I needed it.

If you have solid hiking / running experience and you’re fit, I would highly recommend doing this trail in a day. One important thing to note is that this trail is very dependant on the beach crossings, and some areas are inaccessible during high tide. We managed to land on a day where the tides coincided roughly with our rate of travel, so we never had issue. It took us just under 10 hours with a ratio of probably 70% hiking 30% running and never felt too hard, always enjoyable. It makes the muddy sections of trail not seem so long and the ocean vistas are an endless source of motivation. Get after it! Below is an edit I made of our day. I'm really happy with how well I managed considering I only had 12 days to recover in between my first and second ultra!

https://opsrra.files.wordpress.com/2018/05/a4989-jdf\_map.jpg

https://vimeo.com/354329672

https://www.strava.com/activities/2549388425
