---
title: "Lots of walking, not a lot of climbing in the Bugaboos"
createdAt: "2020-02-01"
description: "Late season trip to the oceans of granite"
img: ""
alt: "Bugaboos"
featured: "no"
tags:
  - hiking
  - climbing
  - bugaboos
  - alpine
---

**A year and a half later, but better late than never! On the weekend before school started up in September 2018, I managed to squeeze in one last summer trip with Levi, Colette, Inuk, Adam and Remi. The following is transcribed from a journal entry I wrote while on the trip.**

**Day 1**: I slept in the back of my truck on Inuk's driveway in Revelstoke for a 5AM wakeup. Everyone rendezvoused here and, after discussing gear, we were off by 7am. A quick stop in Golden and we were on our way up the FSR. I'm sad to report that I must've murdered at least 100 dragonflies, I've never seen so many in my life! After chicken wiring the vehicles, we headed out at around 1PM. The approach is only ~5km, but also has ~1km of vert and our 65lb packs beat us down. Colette was carrying more than half her body weight! The highlight was coming out of the lower talus fields into the upper meadows, offering stunning views of the spires and sprawling glaciers. After setting up camp at boulder campground, we headed up to Applebee to take photos.

**Day 2:** 5AM start, our eyes are set on Pigeon Spire's famous west ridge. Sore shoulders from the day before, but today our packs are much more manageable. The Snowpatch-Bugaboo col has lost its easy snow slope and is now a steep gully of choss, so we will ascend via the bugaboo glacier. Climbing up the trail to the Kain hut, we followed the moraines to climber's left up to the base of Son of a Snowpatch and skirted its edge to the toe of the glacier. Crampons and axes out, we began up the glacier. As we approached the first plateau, crevasses began appearing in front of us. Luckily at this time of year all the crevasses have opened up and very few have snow bridges left, and the ones that do have obvious sags. We continued, slogging our way up. Finally, past the Pigeon Feathers, we approached a large 'schrund split by a rock island. we managed to find a route through, negotiating a 10 foot wide by hundred foot long gaping maw with no bottom in sight.

By now the weather was looking worse with looming black clouds ahead of us. We pushed up a snow marine and arrived at the base of the ridge in full winter conditions. Looking across the Vowell, the Howser towers were engulfed in dark storms. From our vantage point, I could tell that the route wasn't going to go today. The upper ridge was caked in verglass and rime, and even the lower slabs were dusted in a thin layer of slippery snice. We scrambled as high as we felt comfortable, maybe 50-100m up the route, before unanimously agreeing to bail. None of us had any winter climbing experience nor ice gear besides long 20cm glacier screws, so for the current conditions, we were ill equipped. Only 3 hours into our day, we causally strolled back down the glacier, glissading the snow slopes when possible and taking photos. There was one tense moment when Colette lost her footing and slipped, separated from her axe which was firmly in place above where she had plunged it. Luckily this was only a moderate snow slope and she quickly managed to arrest herself by kicking in her crampons and grabbing at the snow. Not 10m below was a narrow crevasse.

Eventually, we landed back on the plateau. With no other objectives for the day, I suggested we practice crevasse rescues while we had convenient access. Inuk volunteered to rap down off a couple screws, while I prepped a 3:1. I was pleased by the efficiency of it, and hauled up Inuk's 140lb frame with next to no difficulty. On our way back, we hugged Son of a Snowpatch a little tighter, and ended up at a single rap station to get down onto the moraines that led back to the Kain hut.

After arriving back at the Kain hut and enjoying the sunshine for a few moments, our relaxation was quickly disrupted by a man frantically waving his arms and whistling from the top of the Dome. Grabbing our packs, we tried our best to jog up the 300m as fast as we could. A lady had tweaked her knee and was unable to put weight on it. However, by the time we had arrived she had already been stabilized and one of the other campers had questionably called a heli in... We bouldered around on the rocks by the camp until the heli arrived and then walked back down to the hut with the camp custodian, who graciously gave use some fresh grown tomatoes once we arrived back. Down back at boulder camp, Inuk and Remi set up a top rope off one of the large rocks above us and began playing around on the moderate routes. Dark fell, it started raining, and it was time for bed.

**Day 3**: Woke up for an alpine start to rain, went back to bed. Set my alarm an hour later and woke up to snow this time, went back to bed. Slept in, it was still snowing, but I eventually hauled myself out of bed. Four of us huddled under a single 5x8 tarp to make breakfast, the typical coffee & oatmeal. After breakfast the fog lifted and we were afforded with a stunning view of all the spires in a fresh coat, glowing in the morning light. We hiked up to the hut and socialized with those inside while enjoying more coffee and reading old stories in the hut's copies of the CAJ.

Around 11am the sun had finally burned up the last of the clouds and it began to warm up, so it was time to move. Today was my last climbing day, with my first day of school starting up in less than 48 hours. Because of the fresh snow we decided not to attempt any of the major spires, but instead set our sights on a 4th class route up above the Dome. We packed our backpacks and headed up again. Within 10 minutes from Applebee, we reached the col that led to the attractive looking blocky NE ridge of Eastpost Spire. Another 10 minutes of scrambling over loose, slush covered rocks and we were at the first set of slabs. One at a time we soloed up and navigated our way towards the snowy summit. Eventually the last pitch presented itself and we made quick work of it, assembling on the summit. It turns out we had climbed the peak in less than 30 minutes, so it was just a tease of climbing in the Bugs, but fun nonetheless.

After food and photos we headed back down, route finding made easy with our up tracks embedded in the 4" of fresh snow. The descent was even faster and in no time we were back at the col. Remi, Inuk and I made a quick detour to the glacial lake above camp and had a very refreshing dip. When we rejoined the group back at camp, they had set up on a perfect splitter on one of the large boulders around camp. Levi got the first send on it and we all projected the climb, with me taking my first real gear fall halfway. Meanwhile, Remi set up an aid line on a thin, broken corner nearby and showed me some aid basics. After this we made the trek back down for dinner, where we were greeted by a massive packrat trying to raid our food. That night, Remi and I set off above our camp for some night photography, with a pristine sky. In bed just before midnight, I fell asleep to the sounds of rockfall echoing off the spires above.

**Day** **4**: Sadly today I had to go home in order to make it in time for classes starting up. I woke up at 5, said my goodbyes to the boys heading out, and returned to bed. Around 8 I stirred again, finished packing up, and made the journey back up to the hut. Here I enjoyed a coffee and reflected on the trip, writing these notes, and started the downhill journey to the car. Letting gravity aid me, I was on the road by 10 and back home in short order.

I cannot wait to return to the bugs with more knowledge and strength, and with better weather. The rock quality truly is pristine and there's a reason why it has gained such international popularity. Until then, the spires will be waiting.
